EIGHT 



The surrender was a bitter pill to swallow, but Marechal Petain was an honorable man. A hero of the last 
war with Germany. Yes, he was old, but Vianne shared the belief that this only gave him a better 
perspective from which to judge their circumstances. He had fashioned a way for their men to come 
home, so it wouldn’t be like the Great War. 

Vianne understood what Isabelle could not: Petain had surrendered on behalf of France to save lives 
and preserve their nation and their way of life. It was true that the terms of this surrender were difficult: 
France had been divided into two zones. The Occupied Zone — the northern half of the country and the 
coastal regions (including Carriveau) — was to be taken over and governed by the Nazis. The great 
middle of the country, the land that lay below Paris and above the sea, would be the Free Zone, 
governed by a new French government in Vichy, led by Marechal Petain himself, in collaboration with 
the Nazis. 

Immediately upon France’s surrender, food became scarce. Laundry soap: unobtainable. Ration 
cards could not be counted upon. Phone service became unreliable, as did the mail. The Nazis 
effectively cut off communication between cities and towns. The only mail allowed was on official 
German postcards. But for Vianne, these were not the worst of the changes. 

Isabelle became impossible to live with. Several times since the surrender, while Vianne toiled to 
reconstruct and replant her garden and repair her damaged fruit trees, she had paused in her work and 
seen Isabelle standing at the gate staring up at the sky as if some dark and horrible thing were headed 
this way. 

All Isabelle could talk about was the monstrosity of the Nazis and their determination to kill the 
French. She had no ability — of course — to hold her tongue, and since Vianne refused to listen, Sophie 
became Isabelle’s audience, her acolyte. She filled poor Sophie’s head with terrible images of what 
would happen, so much so that the child had nightmares. Vianne dared not leave the two of them alone, 
and so today, like each of the previous days, she made them both come to town with her to see what 
their ration cards would get them. 

They had been standing in a food queue at the butcher’s shop for two hours already. Isabelle had 
been complaining nearly that whole time. Apparently it made no sense to her that she should have to 
shop for food. 



“Vianne, look,” Isabelle said. 

More dramatics. 

“Vianne. Look.” 

She turned — just to silence her sister — and saw them. 

Germans. 

Up and down the street, windows and doors slammed shut. People disappeared so quickly Vianne 
found herself suddenly standing alone on the sidewalk with her sister and daughter. She grabbed Sophie 
and pulled her against the butcher shop’s closed door. 

Isabelle stepped defiantly into the street. 

“Isabelle,” Vianne hissed, but Isabelle stood her ground, her green eyes bright with hatred, her pale, 
fine-boned beautiful face marred by scratches and bruises. 

The green lorry in the lead came to a halt in front of Isabelle. In the back, soldiers sat on benches, 
facing one another, rifles laid casually across their laps. They looked young and clean shaven and eager 
in brand-new helmets, with medals glinting on their gray-green uniforms. Young most of all. Not 
monsters; just boys, really. They craned their necks to see what had stopped traffic. At the sight of 
Isabelle standing there, the soldiers started to smile and wave. 

Vianne grabbed Isabelle’s hand and yanked her out of the way. 

The military entourage rumbled past them, a string of vehicles and motorcycles and lorries covered 
in camouflaged netting. Armored tanks rolled thunderously on the cobblestoned street. And then came 
the soldiers. 

Two long lines of them, marching into town. 

Isabelle walked boldly alongside them, up rue Victor Hugo. The Germans waved to her, looking 
more like tourists than conquerors. 

“Maman, you can’t let her go off by herself,” Sophie said. 

“Merde. ” Vianne clutched Sophie’s hand and ran after Isabelle. They caught up with her in the next 
block. 

The town square, usually full of people, had practically emptied. Only a few townspeople dared to 
remain as the German vehicles pulled up in front of the town hall and parked. 

An officer appeared — or Vianne assumed he was an officer because of the way he began barking 
orders. 

Soldiers marched around the large cobblestoned square, claiming it with their overwhelming 
presence. They ripped down the flag of France and replaced it with their Nazi flag: a huge black 
swastika against a red and black background. When it was in place, the troops stopped as one, extended 
their right arms, and yelled, “Heil Hitler. ” 

“If I had a gun,” Isabelle said, “I’d show them not all of us wanted to surrender.” 

“Shhh,” Vianne said. “You’ll get us all killed with that mouth of yours. Let’s go.” 

“No. I want — ” 

Vianne spun to face Isabelle. “Enough. You will not draw attention to us. Is that understood?” 




Isabelle gave one last hate-filled glance at the marching soldiers and then let Vianne lead her away. 

They slipped from the main street and entered a dark cleft in the walls that led to a back alley behind 
the milliner’s shop. They could hear the soldiers singing. Then a shot rang out. And another. Someone 
screamed. 

Isabelle stopped. 

“Don’t you dare,” Vianne said. “Move. ” 

They kept to the dark alleys, ducking into doorways when they heard voices coming their way. It 
took longer than usual to get through town, but eventually they made it to the dirt road. They walked 
silently past the cemetery and all the way home. Once inside, Vianne slammed the door behind her and 
locked it. 

“You see?” Isabelle said instantly. She had obviously been waiting to throw out the question. 

“Go to your room,” Vianne said to Sophie. Whatever Isabelle was going to say, she didn’t want 
Sophie to hear. Vianne eased the hat from her head and set down her empty basket. Her hands were 
shaking. 

“They’re here because of the airfield,” Isabelle said. She began pacing. “I didn’t think it would 
happen so fast, even with the surrender. I didn’t believe ... I thought our soldiers would fight anyway. I 
thought...” 

“Quit biting at your nails. You’ll make them bleed, you know.” 

Isabelle looked a madwoman, with her waist-length blond hair falling loose from its braid and her 
bruised face twisted with fury. “The Nazis are here, Vianne. In Carriveau. Their flag flies from the hotel 
de ville as it flies from the Arc du Triomphe and the Eiffel Tower. They weren’t in town five minutes 
and a shot was fired.” 

“The war is over, Isabelle. Marechal Petain said so.” 

“The war is over? The war is over? Did you see them back there, with their guns and their flags and 
their arrogance? We need to get out of here, V. We’ll take Sophie and leave Carriveau.” 

“And go where?” 

“Anywhere. Lyon, maybe. Provence. What was that town in the Dordogne where Maman was born? 
Brantome. We could find her friend, that Basque woman, what was her name? She might help us.” 

“You are giving me a headache.” 

“A headache is the least of your problems,” Isabelle said, pacing again. 

Vianne approached her. “You are not going to do anything crazy or stupid. Am I understood?” 

Isabelle growled in frustration and marched upstairs, slamming the door behind her. 

* * * 



Surrender. 

The word stuck in Isabelle’s thoughts. That night, as she lay in the downstairs guest bedroom, 
staring up at the ceiling, she felt frustration lodge in her so deeply she could hardly think straight. 

Was she supposed to spend the war in this house like some helpless girl, doing laundry and standing 




in food lines and sweeping the floor? Was she to stand by and watch the enemy take everything from 
France? 

She had always felt lonely and frustrated — or at least she had felt it for as long as she could 
remember — but never as sharply as now. She was stuck here in the country with no friends and nothing 
to do. 

No. 

There must be something she could do. Even here, even now. 

Hide the valuables. 

It was all that came to her. The Germans would loot the houses in town; of that she had no doubt, 
and when they did they would take everything of value. Her own government — cowards that they were 
— had known that. It was why they had emptied much of the Louvre and put fake paintings on the 
museum walls. 

“Not much of a plan,” she muttered. But it was better than nothing. 

The next day, as soon as Vianne and Sophie left for school, Isabelle began. She ignored Vianne ’s 
request that she go to town for food. She couldn’t stand to see the Nazis, and one day without meat 
would hardly matter. Instead, she searched the house, opening closets and rummaging through drawers 
and looking under the beds. She took every item of value and set it on the trestle table in the dining 
room. There were lots of valuable heirlooms. Lacework tatted by her great-grandmother, a set of 
sterling silver salt and pepper shakers, a gilt-edged Limoges platter that had been their aunt’s, several 
small impressionist paintings, a tablecloth made of fine ivory Alen^on lace, several photograph albums, 
a silver-framed photograph of Vianne and Antoine and baby Sophie, her mother’s pearls, Vianne ’s 
wedding dress and more. Isabelle boxed up everything that would fit in a wooden-trimmed leather 
trunk, which she dragged through the trampled grass, wincing every time it scraped on a stone or 
thudded into something. By the time she reached the barn, she was breathing hard and sweating. 

The barn was smaller than she remembered. The hayloft — once the only place in the world where 
she was happy — was really just a small tier on the second floor, a bit of floor perched at the top of a 
rickety ladder and beneath the roof, through which slats of sky could be seen. How many hours had she 
spent up there alone with her picture books, pretending that someone cared enough to come looking for 
her? Waiting for her sister, who was always out with Rachel or Antoine. 

She pushed that memory aside. 

The center of the barn was no more than thirty feet wide. It had been built by her great-grandfather 
to hold buggies — back when the family had money. Now there was only an old Renault parked in the 
center. The stalls were filled with tractor parts and web-draped wooden ladders and rusted farm 
implements. 

She closed the barn door and went to the automobile. The driver’s side door opened with a 
squeaking, clattering reluctance. She climbed in, started the engine, drove forward about eight feet, and 
then parked. 

The trapdoor was revealed now. About five feet long and four feet wide and made of planks 




connected by leather straps, the cellar door was nearly impossible to see, especially as it was now, 
covered in dust and old hay. She pulled the trapdoor open, letting it rest against the automobile’s 
dinged-up bumper, and peered down into the musty darkness. 

Holding the trunk by its strap, she turned on her torchlight and clamped it under her other armpit and 
climbed down the ladder slowly, clanking the trunk down, rung by rung, until she was at the bottom. 
The trunk clattered onto the dirt floor beside her. 

Like the loft, this hidey-hole had seemed bigger to her as a child. It was about eight feet wide and 
ten feet long, with shelving along one side and an old mattress on the floor. The shelves used to hold 
barrels for winemaking, but a lantern was the only thing left on the shelves. 

She tucked the trunk into the back corner and then went back to the house, where she gathered up 
some preserved food, blankets, some medical supplies, her father’s hunting shotgun, and a bottle of 
wine, all of which she put out on the shelves. 

When she climbed back up the ladder, she found Vianne in the barn. 

“What in the world are you doing out here?” 

Isabelle wiped her dusty hands on the worn cotton of her skirt. “Hiding your valuables and putting 
supplies down here — in case we need to hide from the Nazis. Come down and look. I did a good job, I 
think.” She backed down the ladder and Vianne followed her into the darkness. Lighting a lantern, 
Isabelle proudly showed off Papa’s shotgun and the foodstuffs and medical supplies. 

Vianne went straight to their mother’s jewelry box, opening it. 

Inside lay brooches and earrings and necklaces, mostly costume pieces. But at the bottom, lying on 
blue velvet, were the pearls that Grandmere had worn on her wedding day and given to Maman to wear 
on her wedding day. 

“You may need to sell them someday,” Isabelle said. 

Vianne clamped the box shut. “They are heirlooms, Isabelle. For Sophie’s wedding day — and yours. 
I would never sell them.” She sighed impatiently and turned to Isabelle. “What food were you able to 
get in town?” 

“I did this instead.” 

“Of course you did. It’s more important to hide Maman’s pearls than to feed your niece supper. 
Honestly, Isabelle.” Vianne climbed up the ladder, her displeasure revealed in tiny, disgusted huffs. 

Isabelle left the cellar and drove the Renault back into place over the door. Then she hid the keys 
behind a broken board in one of the stalls. At the last moment, she disabled the automobile by removing 
the distributor cap. She hid it with the keys. 

When she finally returned to the house, Vianne was in the kitchen, frying potatoes in a cast-iron 
skillet. “I hope you aren’t hungry.” 

“I’m not.” She moved past Vianne, barely making eye contact. “Oh, and I hid the keys and 
distributor cap in the first stall, behind a broken board.” In the living room, she turned on the radio and 
scooted close, hoping for news from the BBC. 

There was a staticky crackle and then an unfamiliar voice said, “This is the BBC. General de Gaulle 




is speaking to you.” 

“Vianne!” Isabelle yelled toward the kitchen. “Who is General de Gaulle?” 

Vianne came into the living room, drying her hands on her apron. “What is — ” 

“Shush,” Isabelle snapped. 

“... the leaders who have been at the head of the French army for many years have formed a 
government. On the pretext that our army has been defeated, this government has approached the enemy 
with a view to ceasing hostilities.” 

Isabelle stared at the small wooden radio, transfixed. This man they’d never heard of spoke directly 
to the people of France, not at them as Petain had done, but to them in an impassioned voice. “Pretext of 
defeat. I knew it!” 

“... we certainly have been, and still are, submerged by the mechanical strength of the enemy, both 
on land and in the air. The tanks, the aeroplanes, the tactics of the Germans astounded our generals to 
such an extent that they have been brought to the pain which they are in today. But has the last word 
been said? Has all hope disappeared? Is the defeat final?” 

“Mon Dieu,” Isabelle said. This was what she’d been waiting to hear. There was something to be 
done, a fight to engage in. The surrender wasn’t final. 

“Whatever happens,” de Gaulle’s voice went on, “the flame of French resistance must not and shall 
not die.” 

Isabelle hardly noticed that she was crying. The French hadn’t given up. Now all Isabelle had to do 
was figure out how to answer this call. 



* * * 

Two days after the Nazis occupied Carriveau, they called a meeting for the late afternoon. Everyone was 
to attend. No exceptions. Even so, Vianne had had to fight with Isabelle to get her to come. As usual, 
Isabelle did not think ordinary rules pertained to her and she wanted to use defiance to show her 
displeasure. As if the Nazis cared what one impetuous eighteen-year-old girl thought of their occupation 
of her country. 

“Wait here,” Vianne said impatiently when she’d finally gotten Isabelle and Sophie out of the house. 
She gently closed the broken gate behind them. It gave a little click of closure. 

Moments later, Rachel appeared in the road, coming toward them, with the baby in her arms and 
Sarah at her side. 

“That’s my best friend, Sarah,” Sophie said, gazing up at Isabelle. 

“Isabelle,” Rachel said with a smile. “It is good to see you again.” 

“Is it?” Isabelle said. 

Rachel moved closer to Isabelle. “That was a long time ago,” Rachel said gently. “We were young 
and stupid and selfish. I’m sorry we treated you badly. Ignored you. That must have been very painful.” 
Isabelle’s mouth opened, closed. For once, she had nothing to say. 

“Let’s go,” Vianne said, irritated that Rachel had said to Isabelle what Vianne had not been able to. 




“We shouldn’t be late.” 

Even this late in the day, the weather was unseasonably warm, and in no time, Vianne felt herself 
beginning to sweat. In town, they joined the grumbling crowd that filled the narrow cobblestoned street 
from storefront to storefront. The shops were closed and the windows were shuttered, even though the 
heat would be unbearable when they got home. Most of the display cases were empty, which was hardly 
surprising. The Germans ate so much; even worse, they left food on their plates in the cafes. Careless 
and cruel, it was, with so many mothers beginning to count the jars in their cellars so that they could 
dole out every precious bite to their children. Nazi propaganda was everywhere, on windows and shop 
walls; posters that showed smiling German soldiers surrounded by French children with captions 
designed to encourage the French to accept their conquerors and become good citizens of the Reich. 

As the crowd approached the town hall, the grumbling stopped. Up close, it felt even worse, this 
following of instructions, walking blindly into a place with guarded doors and locked windows. 

“We shouldn’t go in,” Isabelle said. 

Rachel, who stood between the sisters, towering over both of them, made a tsking sound. She 
resettled the baby in her arms, patting his back in a comforting rhythm. “We have been summoned.” 

“All the more reason to hide,” Isabelle said. 

“Sophie and I are going in,” Vianne said, although she had to admit that she felt a prickly sense of 
foreboding. 

“I have a bad feeling about it,” Isabelle muttered. 

Fike a thousand-legged centipede, the crowd moved forward into the great hall. Tapestries had once 
hung from these walls, leftover treasure from the time of kings, when the Foire Valley had been the 
royal hunting ground, but all that was gone now. Instead there were swastikas and propagandist posters 
on the walls — Trust in the Reich ! — and a huge painting of Hitler. 

Beneath the painting stood a man wearing a black field tunic decorated with medals and iron 
crosses, knee breeches, and spit-shined boots. A red swastika armband circled his right bicep. 

When the hall was full, the soldiers closed the oak doors, which creaked in protest. The officer at the 
front of the hall faced them, shot his right arm out, and said, “Heil Hitler. ” 

The crowd murmured softly among themselves. What should they do? “Heil Hitler a few said 
grudgingly. The room began to smell of sweat and leather polish and cigarette smoke. 

“I am Sturmbannfiihrer Weldt of the Geheime Staatspolizei. The Gestapo,” the man in the black 
uniform said in heavily accented French. “I am here to carry out the terms of the armistice on behalf of 
the fatherland and the Fiihrer. It will be of little hardship on those of you who obey the rules.” He 
cleared his throat. 

“The rules: All radios are to be turned in to us at the town hall, immediately, as are all guns, 
explosives, and ammunition. All operational vehicles will be impounded. All windows will be equipped 
with material for blackout, and you shall use it. A nine p.m. curfew is instantly in effect. No lights shall 
be on after dusk. We will control all food, whether grown or imported.” He paused, looked out over the 
mass of people standing in front of him. “Not so bad, see? We will live together in harmony, yes? But 




know this. Any act of sabotage or espionage or resistance will be dealt with swiftly and without mercy. 
The punishment for such behavior is death by execution.” He pulled a pack of cigarettes from his breast 
pocket and extracted a single cigarette. Lighting it, he stared out at the people so intently it seemed he 
was memorizing each face. “Also, although many of your ragged, cowardly soldiers are returning, we 
must inform you that the men taken prisoner by us shall remain in Germany.” 

Vianne felt confusion ripple through the audience. She looked at Rachel, whose square face was 
blotchy in places — a sign of anxiety. “Marc and Antoine will come home,” Rachel said stubbornly. 

The Sturmbannfiihrer went on. “You may leave now, as I am sure we understand each other. I will 
have officers here until eight forty-five tonight. They will receive your contraband. Do not be late. 
And...” He smiled good-naturedly. “Do not risk your lives to keep a radio. Whatever you keep — or hide 
— we will find, and if we find it ... death.” He said it so casually, and wearing such a fine smile, that for 
a moment, it didn’t sink in. 

The crowd stood there a moment longer, uncertain whether it was safe to move. No one wanted to 
be seen as taking the first step, and then suddenly they were moving, pack-like, toward the open doors 
that led them outside. 

“Bastards,” Isabelle said as they moved into an alley. 

“And I was so sure they’d let us keep our guns,” Rachel said, lighting up a cigarette, inhaling deeply 
and exhaling in a rush. 

“I’m keeping our gun, I can tell you,” Isabelle said in a loud voice. “And our radio.” 

“Shhh,” Vianne said. 

“General de Gaulle thinks — ” 

“I don’t want to hear that foolishness. We have to keep our heads down until our men come home,” 
Vianne said. 

“Mon Dieu, ” Isabelle said sharply. “You think your husband can fix this?” 

“No,” Vianne said. “I believe you will fix it, you and your General de Gaulle, of whom no one has 
ever heard. Now, come. While you are hatching a plan to save France, I need to tend to my garden. 
Come on, Rachel, let us dullards be away.” 

Vianne held tightly to Sophie’s hand and walked briskly ahead. She did not bother to glance back to 
see if Isabelle was following. She knew her sister was back there, hobbling forward on her damaged 
feet. Ordinarily Vianne would keep pace with her sister, out of politeness, but just now she was too mad 
to care. 

“Your sister may not be so wrong,” Rachel said as they passed the Norman church on the edge of 
town. 

“If you take her side in this, I may be forced to hurt you, Rachel.” 

“That being said, your sister may not be entirely wrong.” 

Vianne sighed. “Don’t tell her that. She’s unbearable already.” 

“She will have to learn propriety.” 

“You teach her. She has proven singularly resistant to improving herself or listening to reason. She’s 



been to two finishing schools and still can’t hold her tongue or make polite conversation. Two days ago, 
instead of going to town for meat, she hid the valuables and created a hiding place for us. Just in case.” 
“I should probably hide mine, too. Not that we have much.” 

Vianne pursed her lips. There was no point in talking further about this. Soon, Antoine would be 
home and he would help keep Isabelle in line. 

At the gate to Le Jardin, Vianne said good-bye to Rachel and her children, who kept walking. 

“Why do we have to give them our radio, Maman?” Sophie asked. “It belongs to Papa.” 

“We don’t,” Isabelle said, coming up beside them. “We will hide it.” 

“We will not hide it,” Vianne said sharply. “We will do as we are told and keep quiet and soon 
Antoine will be home and he will know what to do.” 

“Welcome to the Middle Ages, Sophie,” Isabelle said. 

Vianne yanked her gate open, forgetting a second too late that the refugees had broken it. The poor 
thing clattered on its single hinge. It took all of Vianne’s fortitr J ~ to act as if it hadn’t happened. She 
marched up to the house, opened the door, and immediately turned on the kitchen light. “Sophie,” she 
said, unpinning her hat. “Would you please set the table?” 

Vianne ignored her daughter’s grumbling — it was to be expected. In only a few days, Isabelle had 
taught her niece to challenge authority. 

Vianne lit the stove and started cooking. When a creamy potato and lardon soup was simmering, she 
began to clean up. Of course Isabelle was nowhere around to help. Sighing, she filled the sink with 
water to wash dishes. She was so intent on her task that it took her a moment to notice that someone 
was knocking on the front door. Patting her hair, she walked into the living room, where she found 
Isabelle rising from the divan, a book in her hands. Reading while Vianne cooked and cleaned. 
Naturally. 

“Are you expecting anyone?” Isabelle asked. 

Vianne shook her head. 

“Maybe we shouldn’t answer,” Isabelle said. “Pretend we’re not here.” 

“It’s most likely Rachel.” 

There was another knock at the door. 

Slowly, the doorknob turned, and the door creaked open. 

Yes. Of course it was Rachel. Who else would — 

A German soldier stepped into her home. 

“Oh, my pardons,” the man said in terrible French. He removed his military hat, tucked it in his 
armpit, and smiled. He was a good-looking man — tall and broad-shouldered and narrow-hipped, with 
pale skin and light gray eyes. Vianne guessed he was roughly her age. His field uniform was precisely 
pressed and looked brand new. An iron cross decorated his stand-up collar. Binoculars hung from a 
strap around his neck and a chunky leather utility belt cinched his waist. Behind him, through the 
branches of the orchard, she saw his motorcycle parked on the side of the road. A sidecar was attached 
to it, mounted with machine guns. 



“Mademoiselle,” he said to Vianne, giving her a swift nod as he clicked his boots together. 
“Madame,” she corrected him, wishing she sounded haughty and in control, but even to her own 
ears she sounded scared. “Madame Mauriac.” 

“I am Hauptmann — Captain — Wolfgang Beck.” He handed her a piece of paper. “My French is not 
so good. You will excuse my ineptitude, please.” When he smiled, deep dimples formed in his cheeks. 
She took the paper and frowned down at it. “I don’t read German.” 

“What do you want?” Isabelle demanded, coming to stand by Vianne. 

“Your home is most beautiful and very close to the airfield. I noticed it upon our arrival. How many 
bedrooms have you?” 

“Why?” Isabelle said at the same time Vianne said, “Three.” 

“I will billry here,” the captain said in his bad French. 

“Billet?” Vianne said. “You mean ... to stay?” 

“Old, Madame.” 

“Billet? You? A man? A Nazi? No. No.” Isabelle shook her head. “No.” 

The captain’s smile neither faded nor fell. “You were to town,” he said, looking at Isabelle. “I saw 
you when we arrived.” 

“You noticed me?” 

He smiled. “I am sure every red-blooded man in my regiment noticed you.” 

“Funny you would mention blood,” Isabelle said. 

Vianne elbowed her sister. “I am sorry, Captain. My young sister is obstinate on occasion. But I am 
married, you see, and my husband is at the front, and there is my sister and my daughter here, so you 
must see how inappropriate it would be to have you here.” 

“Ah, so you would rather leave the house to me. How difficult that must be for you.” 

“Leave?” Vianne said. 

“I believe you aren’t understanding the captain,” Isabelle said, not taking her gaze from him. “He’s 
moving into your home, taking it over, really, and that piece of paper is a requisition order that makes it 
possible. And Petain’s armistice, of course. We can either make room for him or abandon a home that 
has been in our family for generations.” 

He looked uncomfortable. “This, I’m afraid, is the situation. Many of your fellow villagers are 
facing the same dilemma, I fear.” 

“If we leave, will we get our home back?” Isabelle asked. 

“I would not think so, Madame.” 

Vianne dared to take a step toward him. Perhaps she could reason with him. “My husband will be 
home any day now, I imagine. Perhaps you could wait until he is here?” 

“I am not the general, alas. I am simply a captain in the Wehrmacht. I follow orders, Madame, I do 
not give them. And I am ordered to billet here. But I assure you that I am a gentleman.” 

“We will leave,” Isabelle said. 

“Leave?” Vianne said to her sister in disbelief. “This is my home.” To the captain she said, “I can 




count on you to be a gentleman?” 

“Of course.” 

Vianne looked at Isabelle, who shook her head slowly. 

Vianne knew there was no real choice. She had to keep Sophie safe until Antoine came home, and 
then he would handle this unpleasantness. Surely he would be home soon, now that the armistice had 
been signed. “There is a small bedroom downstairs. You’ll be comfortable there.” 

The captain nodded. “Merci, Madame. I will get my things.” 

* * * 

As soon as the door closed behind the captain, Isabelle said, “Are you mad? We can’t live with a Nazi.” 

“He said he’s in the Wehrmacht. Is that the same thing?” 

“I’m hardly interested in their chain of command. You haven’t seen what they’re willing to do to us, 
Vianne. I have. We’ll leave. Go next door, to Rachel’s. We could live with her.” 

“Rachel’s house is too small for all of us, and I am not going to abandon my home to the Germans.” 

To that, Isabelle had no answer. 

Vianne felt anxiety turn to an itch along her throat. An old nervous habit returned. “You go if you 
must, but I am waiting for Antoine. We have surrendered, so he’ll be home soon.” 

“Vianne, please — ” 

The front door rattled hard. Another knock. 

Vianne walked dully forward. With a shaking hand, she reached for the knob and opened the door. 

Captain Beck stood there, holding his military hat in one hand and a small leather valise in the other. 
He said, “Hello again, Madame,” as if he’d been gone for some time. 

Vianne scratched at her neck, feeling acutely vulnerable beneath this man’s gaze. She backed away 
quickly, saying, “This way, Herr Captain.” 

As she turned, she saw the living room that had been decorated by three generations of her family’s 
women. Golden stucco walls, the color of freshly baked brioche, gray stone floors covered by ancient 
Aubusson rugs, heavily carved wooden furniture upholstered in mohair and tapestry fabric, lamps made 
of porcelain, curtains of gold and red toile, antiques and treasures left over from the years when the 
Rossignols had been wealthy tradesmen. Until recently there had been artwork on the walls. Now only 
the unimportant pieces remained. Isabelle had hidden the good ones. 

Vianne walked past all of it to the small guest bedroom tucked beneath the stairs. At the closed door, 
to the left of the bathroom that had been added in the early twenties, she paused. She could hear him 
breathing behind her. 

She opened the door to reveal a narrow room with a large window, bracketed by blue-gray curtains 
that pooled on the wooden floor. A painted chest of drawers supported a blue pitcher and ewer. In the 
corner was an aged oak armoire with mirrored doors. By the double bed sat a nightstand; on it, an 
antique ormolu clock. Isabelle’s clothes lay everywhere, as if she were packing for an extended holiday. 
Vianne picked them up quickly, and the valise, too. When she finished, she turned. 




His suitcase plunked to the floor. She looked at him, compelled by simple politeness to offer a tense 
smile. 

“You needn’t worry, Madame,” he said. “We have been admonished to act as gentlemen. My mother 
would demand the same, and, in truth, she scares me more than my general.” It was such an ordinary 
remark that Vianne was taken aback. 

She had no idea how to respond to this stranger who dressed like the enemy and looked like a young 
man she might have met at church. And what was the price for saying the wrong thing? 

He remained where he was, a respectful distance from her. “I apologize for any inconvenience, 
Madame.” 

“My husband will be home soon.” 

“We all hope to be home soon.” 

Another unnerving comment. Vianne nodded politely and left him alone in the room, closing the 
door behind her. 

“Tell me he’s not staying,” Isabelle said, rushing at her. 

“He says he is,” Vianne said tiredly, pushing back the hair from her eyes. She realized just now that 
she was trembling. “I know how you feel about these Nazis. Just make sure he doesn’t know it. I won’t 
let you put Sophie at risk with your childish rebellion.” 

“Childish rebellion! Are you — ” 

The guest room door opened, silencing Isabelle. 

Captain Beck strode confidently toward them, smiling broadly. Then he saw the radio in the room 
and he paused. “Do not worry, ladies. I am most pleased to deliver your radio to the Kommandant.” 
“Really?” Isabelle said. “You consider this a kindness?” 

Vianne felt a tightening in her chest. There was a storm brewing in Isabelle. Her sister’s cheeks had 
gone pale, her lips were drawn in a thin, colorless line, her eyes were narrowed. She was glaring at the 
German as if she could kill him with a look. 

“Of course.” He smiled, looking a little confused. The sudden silence seemed to unnerve him. 
Suddenly he said, “You have beautiful hair, M’mselle.” At Isabelle’s frown, he said, “This is an 
appropriate compliment, yes?” 

“Do you think so?” Isabelle said, her voice low. 

“Quite lovely.” Beck smiled. 

Isabelle walked into the kitchen and came back with a pair of boning shears. 

His smile faded. “Am I misunderstood?” 

Vianne said, “Isabelle, don’t,” just as Isabelle gathered up her thick blond hair and fisted it. Staring 
grimly at Captain Beck’s handsome face, she hacked off her hair and handed the long blond tail to him. 
“It must be verboten for us to have anything beautiful, is it not, Captain Beck?” 

Vianne gasped. “Please, sir. Ignore her. Isabelle is a silly, prideful girl.” 

“No,” Beck said. “She is angry. And angry people make mistakes in war and die.” 

“So do conquering soldiers,” Isabelle snapped. 




Beck laughed at her. 

Isabelle made a sound that was practically a snarl and pivoted on her heel. She marched up the stairs 
and slammed the door shut so hard the house shook. 

* * * 

“You will want to speak to her now, I warrant,” Beck said. He looked at Vianne in a way that made it 
seem as if they understood each other. “Such . . . theatrics in the wrong place could be most dangerous.” 

Vianne left him standing in her living room and went upstairs. She found Isabelle sitting on Sophie’s 
bed, so angry she was shaking. 

Scratches marred her cheeks and throat; a reminder of what she’d seen and survived. And now her 
hair was hacked off, the ends uneven. 

Vianne tossed Isabelle’s belongings onto the unmade bed and closed the door behind her. “What in 
the name of all that’s holy were you thinking?” 

“I could kill him in his sleep, just slit his throat.” 

“And do you think they would not come looking for a captain who had orders to billet here? Mon 
Dieu, Isabelle.” She took a deep breath to calm her racing nerves. “I know there are problems between 
us, Isabelle. I know I treated you badly as a child — I was too young and scared to help you — and Papa 
treated you worse. But this is not about us now, and you can’t be the girl who acts impetuously 
anymore. It is about my daughter now. Your niece. We must protect her.” 

“But—” 

“France has surrendered, Isabelle. Certainly this fact has not escaped you.” 

“Didn’t you hear General de Gaulle? He said — ” 

“And who is this General de Gaulle? Why should we listen to him? Marechal Petain is a war hero 
and our leader. We have to trust our government.” 

“Are you joking, Vianne? The government in Vichy is collaborating with Hitler. How can you not 
understand this danger? Petain is wrong. Does one follow a leader blindly?” 

Vianne moved toward Isabelle slowly, half afraid of her now. “You don’t remember the last war,” 
she said, clasping her hands to still them. “I do. I remember the fathers and brothers and uncles who 
didn’t come home. I remember hearing children in my class cry quietly when bad news came by 
telegram. I remember the men who came home on crutches, their pant legs empty and flapping, or an 
arm gone, or a face mined. I remember how Papa was before the war — and how different he was when 
he came home, how he drank and slammed doors and screamed at us, and then when he stopped. I 
remember the stories about Verdun and Somme and a million Frenchmen dying in trenches that ran red 
with blood. And the German atrocities, don’t forget that part of it. They were cruel, Isabelle.” 

“That’s my point exactly. We must — ” 

“They were cruel because we were at war with them, Isabelle. Petain has saved us from going 
through that again. He has kept us safe. He has stopped the war. Now Antoine and all our men will 
come home.” 




“To a Heil Hitler world?” Isabelle said with a sneer. “‘The flame of French resistance must not and 
shall not die? That’s what de Gaulle said. We have to fight however we can. For France, V. So it stays 
France.” 

“Enough,” Vianne said. She moved close enough that she could have whispered to Isabelle, or 
kissed her, but Vianne did neither. In a steady, even voice, she said, “You will take Sophie’s room 
upstairs and she will move in with me. And remember this, Isabelle, he could shoot us. Shoot us, and no 
one would care. You will not provoke this soldier in my home.” 

She saw the words hit home. Isabelle stiffened. “I will try to hold my tongue.” 

“Do more than try.” 