FOUR

June 1940 
France 



The medieval villa dominated a deeply green, forested hillside. It looked like something in a 
confectioner’s shopwindow; a castle sculpted of caramel, with spun-sugar windows and shutters the 
color of candied apples. Far below, a deep blue lake absorbed the reflection of the clouds. Manicured 
gardens allowed the villa’s occupants — and, more important, their guests — to stroll about the grounds, 
where only acceptable topics were to be discussed. 

In the formal dining room, Isabelle Rossignol sat stiffly erect at the white-clothed table that easily 
accommodated twenty-four diners. Everything in this room was pale. Walls and floor and ceiling were 
all crafted of oyster-hued stone. The ceiling arched into a peak nearly twenty feet overhead. Sound was 
amplified in this cold room, as trapped as the occupants. 

Madame Dufour stood at the head of the table, dressed in a severe black dress that revealed the soup 
spoon-sized hollow at the base of her long neck. A single diamond brooch was her only adornment (one 
good piece, ladies, and choose it well; everything makes a statement, nothing speaks quite so loudly as 
cheapness). Her narrow face ended in a blunt chin and was framed by curls so obviously peroxided the 
desired impression of youth was quite undone. “The trick,” she was saying in a cultivated voice, clipped 
and cut, “is to be completely quiet and unremarkable in your task.” 

Each of the girls at the table wore the fitted blue woolen jacket and skirt that was the school 
uniform. It wasn’t so bad in the winter, but on this hot June afternoon, the ensemble was unbearable. 
Isabelle could feel herself beginning to sweat, and no amount of lavender in her soap could mask the 
sharp scent of her perspiration. 

She stared down at the unpeeled orange placed in the center of her Limoges china plate. Flatware 
lay in precise formation on either side of the plate. Salad fork, dinner fork, knife, spoon, butter knife, 
fish fork. It went on and on. 

“Now,” Madame Dufour said. “Pick up the correct utensils — quietly, s’// vous plait, quietly, and peel 
your orange.” 

Isabelle picked up her fork and tried to ease the sharp prongs into the heavy peel, but the orange 
rolled away from her and bumped over the gilt edge of the plate, clattering the china. 

“Merde, ” she muttered, grabbing the orange before it fell to the floor. 

“Merde ? ” Madame Dufour was beside her. 

Isabelle jumped in her seat. Mon Dieu, the woman moved like a viper in the reeds. “Pardon, 



Madame,” Isabelle said, returning the orange to its place. 

“Mademoiselle Rossignol,” Madame said. “How is it that you have graced our halls for two years 
and learned so little?” 

Isabelle again stabbed the orange with her fork. A graceless — but effective — move. Then she smiled 
up at Madame. “Generally, Madame, the failing of a student to learn is the failing of the teacher to 
teach.” 

Breaths were indrawn all down the table. 

“Ah,” Madame said. “So we are the reason you still cannot manage to eat an orange properly.” 

Isabelle tried to slice through the peel — too hard, too fast. The silver blade slipped off the puckered 
peel and clanged on the china plate. 

Madame Dufour’s hand snaked out; her fingers coiled around Isabelle’s wrist. 

All up and down the table, the girls watched. 

“Polite conversation, girls,” Madame said, smiling thinly. “No one wants a statue for a dinner 
partner.” 

On cue, the girls began speaking quietly to one another about things that did not interest Isabelle. 
Gardening, weather, fashion. Acceptable topics for women. Isabelle heard the girl next to her say 
quietly, “I am so very fond of Alen^on lace, aren’t you?” and really, it was all she could do to keep from 
screaming. 

“Mademoiselle Rossignol,” Madame said. “You will go see Madame Allard and tell her that our 
experiment has come to an end.” 

“What does that mean?” 

“She will know. Go.” 

Isabelle scooted back from the table quickly, lest Madame change her mind. 

Madame ’s face scrunched in displeasure at the loud screech the chair legs made on the stone floor. 

Isabelle smiled. “I really do not like oranges, you know.” 

“Really?” Madame said sarcastically. 

Isabelle wanted to run from this stifling room, but she was already in enough trouble, so she forced 
herself to walk slowly, her shoulders back, her chin up. At the stairs (which she could navigate with 
three books on her head if required), she glanced sideways, saw that she was alone, and rushed down. 

In the hallway below, she slowed and straightened. By the time she reached the headmistress’s 
office, she wasn’t even breathing hard. 

She knocked. 

At Madame’s flat “Come in,” Isabelle opened the door. 

Madame Allard sat behind a gilt-trimmed mahogany writing desk. Medieval tapestries hung from 
the stone walls of the room and an arched, leaded-glass window overlooked gardens so sculpted they 
were more art than nature. Even birds rarely landed here; no doubt they sensed the stifling atmosphere 
and flew on. 

Isabelle sat down — remembering an instant too late that she hadn’t been offered a seat. She popped 




back up. “Pardon, Madame.” 

“Sit down, Isabelle.” 

She did, carefully crossing her ankles as a lady should, clasping her hands together. “Madame 
Dufour asked me to tell you that the experiment is over.” 

Madame reached for one of the Murano fountain pens on her desk and picked it up, tapping it on the 
desk. “Why are you here, Isabelle?” 

“I hate oranges.” 

“Pardon?” 

“And if I were to eat an orange — which, honestly, Madame, why would I when I don’t like them — I 
would use my hands like the Americans do. Like everyone does, really. A fork and knife to eat an 
orange?” 

“I mean, why are you at the school?” 

“Oh. That. Well, the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Avignon expelled me. For nothing, I might 
add.” 

“And the Sisters of St. Francis?” 

“Ah. They had reason to expel me.” 

“And the school before that?” 

Isabelle didn’t know what to say. 

Madame put down her fountain pen. “You are almost nineteen.” 

“Old, Madame.” 

“I think it’s time for you to leave.” 

Isabelle got to her feet. “Shall I return to the orange lesson?” 

“You misunderstand. I mean you should leave the school, Isabelle. It is clear that you are not 
interested in learning what we have to teach you.” 

“How to eat an orange and when you can spread cheese and who is more important — the second son 
of a duke or a daughter who won’t inherit or an ambassador to an unimportant country? Madame, do 
you not know what is going on in the world?” 

Isabelle might have been secreted deep in the countryside, but still she knew. Even here, barricaded 
behind hedges and bludgeoned by politeness, she knew what was happening in France. At night in her 
monastic cell, while her classmates were in bed, she sat up, long into the night, listening to the BBC on 
her contraband radio. France had joined Britain in declaring war on Germany, and Hitler was on the 
move. All across France people had stockpiled food and put up blackout shades and learned to live like 
moles in the dark. 

They had prepared and worried and then . . . nothing. 

Month after month, nothing happened. 

At first all anyone could talk about was the Great War and the losses that had touched so many 
families, but as the months went on, and there was only talk of war, Isabelle heard her teachers calling it 
the drole de guerre, the phony war. The real horror was happening elsewhere in Europe; in Belgium and 




Holland and Poland. 

“Will manners not matter in war, Isabelle?” 

“They don’t matter now,” Isabelle said impulsively, wishing a moment later that she’d said nothing. 

Madame stood. “We were never the right place for you, but. . .” 

“My father would put me anywhere to be rid of me,” she said. Isabelle would rather blurt out the 
truth than hear another lie. She had learned many lessons in the parade of schools and convents that had 
housed her for more than a decade — most of all, she’d learned that she had to rely on herself. Certainly 
her father and her sister couldn’t be counted on. 

Madame looked at Isabelle. Her nose flared ever so slightly, an indication of polite but pained 
disapproval. “It is hard for a man to lose his wife.” 

“It is hard for a girl to lose her mother.” She smiled defiantly. “I lost both parents though, didn’t I? 
One died, and the other turned his back on me. I can’t say which hurt more.” 

“Mon Dieu, Isabelle, must you always speak whatever is on your mind?” 

Isabelle had heard this criticism all her life, but why should she hold her tongue? No one listened to 
her either way. 

“So you will leave today. I will telegram your father. Tomas will take you to the train.” 

“Tonight?” Isabelle blinked. “But ... Papa won’t want me.” 

“Ah. Consequences,” Madame said. “Perhaps now you will see that they should be considered.” 

* * * 

Isabelle was alone on a train again, heading toward an unknown reception. 

She stared out the dirty, mottled window at the flashing green landscape: fields of hay, red roofs, 
stone cottages, gray bridges, horses. 

Everything looked exactly as it always had and that surprised her. War was coming, and she’d 
imagined it would leave a mark on the countryside somehow, changing the grass color or killing the 
trees or scaring away the birds, but now, as she sat on this train chugging into Paris, she saw that 
everything looked completely ordinary. 

At the sprawling Gare de Lyon, the train came to a wheezing, belching stop. Isabelle reached down 
for the small valise at her feet and pulled it onto her lap. As she watched the passengers shuffle past her, 
exiting the train carriage, the question she’d avoided came back to her. 

Papa. 

She wanted to believe he would welcome her home, that finally, he would hold out his hands and 
say her name in a loving way, the way he had Before, when Maman had been the glue that held them 
together. 

She stared down at her scuffed suitcase. 

So small. 

Most of the girls in the schools she’d attended had arrived with a collection of trunks bound in 
leather straps and studded with brass tacks. They had pictures on their desks and mementos on their 




nightstands and photograph albums in their drawers. 

Isabelle had a single framed photograph of a woman she wanted to remember and couldn’t. When 
she tried, all that came to her were blurry images of people crying and the physician shaking his head 
and her mother saying something about holding tightly to her sister’s hand. 

As if that would help. Vianne had been as quick to abandon Isabelle as Papa had been. 

She realized that she was the only one left in the carriage. Clasping her suitcase in her gloved hand, 
she sidled out of the seat and exited the carriage. 

The platforms were full of people. Trains stood in shuddering rows; smoke filled the air, puffed up 
toward the high, arched ceiling. Somewhere a whistle blared. Great iron wheels began to churn. The 
platform trembled beneath her feet. 

Her father stood out, even in the crowd. 

When he spotted her, she saw the irritation that transformed his features, reshaped his expression 
into one of grim determination. 

He was a tall man, at least six foot two, but he had been bent by the Great War. Or at least that was 
what Isabelle remembered hearing once. His broad shoulders sloped downward, as if posture were too 
much to think about with all that was on his mind. His thinning hair was gray and unkempt. He had a 
broad, flattened nose, like a spatula, and lips as thin as an afterthought. On this hot summer day, he wore 
a wrinkled white shirt, with sleeves rolled up; a tie hung loosely tied around his fraying collar, and his 
corduroy pants were in need of laundering. 

She tried to look ... mature. Perhaps that was what he wanted of her. 

“Isabelle.” 

She clutched her suitcase handle in both hands. “Papa.” 

“Kicked out of another one.” 

She nodded, swallowing hard. 

“How will we find another school in these times?” 

That was her opening. “I want to live with you, Papa.” 

“With me?” He seemed irritated and surprised. But wasn’t it normal for a girl to want to live with 
her father? 

She took a step toward him. “I could work in the bookstore. I won’t get in your way.” 

She drew in a sharp breath, waiting. Sound amplified suddenly. She heard people walking, the 
platforms groaning beneath them, pigeons flapping their wings overhead, a baby crying. 

Of course, Isabelle. 

Come home. 

Her father sighed in disgust and walked away. 

“Well,” he said, looking back. “Are you coming?” 

* * * 



Isabelle lay on a blanket in the sweet-smelling grass, a book open in front of her. Somewhere nearby a 




bee buzzed at a blossom; it sounded like a tiny motorcycle amid all this quiet. It was a blisteringly hot 
day, a week after she’d come home to Paris. Well, not home. She knew her father was still plotting to be 
rid of her, but she didn’t want to think about that on such a gorgeous day, in the air that smelled of 
cherries and sweet, green grass. 

“You read too much,” Christophe said, chewing on a stalk of hay. “What is that, a romantic novel?” 

She rolled toward him, snapping the book shut. It was about Edith Cavell, a nurse in the Great War. 
A hero. “I could be a war hero, Christophe.” 

He laughed. “A girl? A hero? Absurd.” 

Isabelle got to her feet quickly, yanking up her hat and white kid gloves. 

“Don’t be mad,” he said, grinning up at her. “I’m just tired of the war talk. And it’s a fact that 
women are useless in war. Your job is to wait for our return.” 

He propped his cheek in one hand and peered up at her through the mop of blond hair that fell across 
his eyes. In his yachting-style blazer and wide-legged white pants, he looked exactly like what he was — 
a privileged university student who was unused to work of any kind. Many students his age had 
volunteered to leave university and join the army. Not Christophe. 

Isabelle hiked up the hill and through the orchard, out to the grassy knoll where his open-topped 
Panhard was parked. 

She was already behind the wheel, with the engine running, when Christophe appeared, a sheen of 
sweat on his conventionally handsome face, the empty picnic basket hanging from his arm. 

“Just throw that stuff in the back,” she said with a bright smile. 

“You’re not driving.” 

“It appears that I am. Now get in.” 

“It’s my automobile, Isabelle.” 

“Well, to be precise — and I know how important the facts are to you, Christophe — it’s your mother’s 
automobile. And I believe a woman should drive a woman’s automobile.” 

Isabelle tried not to smile when he rolled his eyes and muttered “fine” and leaned over to place the 
basket behind Isabelle’s seat. Then, moving slowly enough to make his point, he walked around the 
front of the automobile and took his place in the seat beside her. 

He had no sooner clicked the door shut than she put the automobile in gear and stomped on the gas. 
The automobile hesitated for a second, then lurched forward, spewing dust and smoke as it gathered 
speed. 

“Mon Dieu, Isabelle. Slow down!” 

She held on to her flapping straw hat with one hand and clutched the steering wheel with the other. 
She barely slowed as she passed other motorists. 

“Mon Dieu, slow down,” he said again. 

Certainly he must know that she had no intention of complying. 

“A woman can go to war these days,” Isabelle said when the Paris traffic finally forced her to slow 
down. “I could be an ambulance driver, maybe. Or I could work on breaking secret codes. Or charming 




the enemy into telling me a secret location or plan. Remember that game — ” 

“War is not a game, Isabelle.” 

“I believe I know that, Christophe. But if it does come, I can help. That’s all I’m saying.” 

On the rue de l’Amiral de Coligny, she had to slam on the brakes to avoid hitting a lorry. A convoy 
from the Comedie Fran^aise was pulling out of the Louvre museum. In fact, there were lorries 
everywhere and uniformed gendarmes directing traffic. Sandbags were piled up around several 
buildings and monuments to protect from attack — of which there had been none since France joined the 
war. 

Why were there so many French policemen out here? 

“Odd,” Isabelle mumbled, frowning. 

Christophe craned his neck to see what was going on. “They’re moving treasures out of the Louvre,” 
he said. 

Isabelle saw a break in traffic and sped up. In no time, she had pulled up in front of her father’s 
bookshop and parked. 

She waved good-bye to Christophe and ducked into the shop. It was long and narrow, lined from 
floor to ceiling with books. Over the years, her father had tried to increase his inventory by building 
freestanding bookcases. The result of his “improvements” was the creation of a labyrinth. The stacks led 
one this way and that, deeper and deeper within. At the very back were the books for tourists. Some 
stacks were well lit, some in shadows. There weren’t enough outlets to illuminate every nook and 
cranny. But her father knew every title on every shelf. 

“You’re late,” he said, looking up from his desk in the back. He was doing something with the 
printing press, probably making one of his books of poetry, which no one ever purchased. His blunt- 
tipped fingers were stained blue. “I suppose boys are more important to you than employment.” 

She slid onto the stool behind the cash register. In the week she’d lived with her father she’d made it 
a point not to argue back, although acquiescing gnawed at her. She tapped her foot impatiently. Words, 
phrases — excuses — clamored to be spoken aloud. It was hard not to tell him how she felt, but she knew 
how badly he wanted her gone, so she held her tongue. 

“Do you hear that?” he said sometime later. 

Had she fallen asleep? 

Isabelle sat up. She hadn’t heard her father approach, but he was beside her now, frowning. 

There was a strange sound in the bookshop, to be sure. Dust fell from the ceiling; the bookcases 
clattered slightly, making a sound like chattering teeth. Shadows passed in front of the leaded-glass 
display windows at the entrance. Hundreds of them. 

People? So many of them? 

Papa went to the door. Isabelle slid off her stool and followed him. As he opened the door, she saw a 
crowd running down the street, filling the sidewalks. 

“What in the world?” Papa muttered. 

Isabelle pushed past Papa, elbowed her way into the crowd. 




A man bumped into her so hard she stumbled, and he didn’t even apologize. More people rushed 
past them. 

“What is it? What’s happened?” she asked a florid, wheezing man who was trying to break free of 
the crowd. 

“The Germans are coming into Paris,” he said. “We must leave. I was in the Great War. I know. . .” 

Isabelle scoffed. “Germans in Paris? Impossible.” 

He ran away, bobbing from side to side, weaving, his hands fisting and unfisting at his sides. 

“We must get home,” Papa said, locking the bookshop door. 

“It can’t be true,” she said. 

“The worst can always be true,” Papa said grimly. “Stay close to me,” he added, moving into the 
crowd. 

Isabelle had never seen such panic. All up and down the street, lights were coming on, automobiles 
were starting, doors were slamming shut. People screamed to one another and reached out, trying to stay 
connected in the melee. 

Isabelle stayed close to her father. The pandemonium in the streets slowed them down. The Metro 
tunnels were too crowded to navigate, so they had to walk all the way. It was nearing nightfall when 
they finally made it home. At their apartment building, it took her father two tries to open the main 
door, his hands were shaking so badly. Once in, they ignored the rickety cage elevator and hurried up 
five flights of stairs to their apartment. 

“Don’t turn on the lights,” her father said harshly as he opened the door. 

Isabelle followed him into the living room and went past him to the window, where she lifted the 
blackout shade, peering out. 

From far away came a droning sound. As it grew louder, the window rattled, sounding like ice in a 
glass. 

She heard a high whistling sound only seconds before she saw the black flotilla in the sky, like birds 
flying in formation. 

Aeroplanes. 

“Bodies,” her father whispered. 

Germans. 

German aeroplanes, flying over Paris. The whistling sound increased, became like a woman’s 
scream, and then somewhere — maybe in the second arrondissement, she thought — a bomb exploded in 
a flash of eerie bright light, and something caught fire. 

The air raid siren sounded. Her father wrenched the curtains shut and led her out of the apartment 
and down the stairs. Their neighbors were all doing the same thing, carrying coats and babies and pets 
down the stairs to the lobby and then down the narrow, twisting stone stairs that led to the cellar. In the 
dark, they sat together, crowded in close. The air stank of mildew and body odor and fear — that was the 
sharpest scent of all. The bombing went on and on and on, screeching and droning, the cellar walls 
vibrating around them; dust fell from the ceiling. A baby started crying and couldn’t be soothed. 




“Shut that child up, please,” someone snapped. 

“I am trying, M’sieur. He is scared.” 

“So are we all.” 

After what felt like an eternity, silence fell. It was almost worse than the noise. What of Paris was 
left? 

By the time the all clear sounded, Isabelle felt numb. 

“Isabelle?” 

She wanted her father to reach out for her, to take her hand and comfort her, even if it was just for a 
moment, but he turned away from her and headed up the dark, twisting basement stairs. In their 
apartment, Isabelle went immediately to the window, peering past the shade to look for the Eiffel Tower. 
It was still there, rising above a wall of thick black smoke. 

“Don’t stand by the windows,” he said. 

She turned slowly. The only light in the room was from his torch, a sickly yellow thread in the dark. 
“Paris won’t fall,” she said. 

He said nothing. Frowned. She wondered if he was thinking of the Great War and what he’d seen in 
the trenches. Perhaps his injury was hurting again, aching in sympathy with the sound of falling bombs 
and hissing flames. 

“Go to bed, Isabelle.” 

“How can I possibly sleep at a time like this?” 

He sighed. “You will learn that a lot of things are possible.” 